Chapter 1
Introduction to
Networks
THE FOLLOWING COMPTIA NETWORK+ EXAM OBJECTIVES
ARE COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Domain 1.0 Networking Concepts
• 1.6 Compare and contrast network topologies,
architectures, and types.
• Mesh
• Hybrid
• Star/hub and spoke
• Spine and leaf
• Point to point
• Three-tier hierarchical model
• Core
• Distribution
• Access
• Traffic flows
• North-south
• East-west
You'd have to work pretty hard these days to find someone
who would argue when we say that our computers have
become invaluable to us personally and professionally. Our
society has become highly dependent on the resources they
offer and on sharing them with each other. The ability to
communicate with others—whether they're in the same
building or in some faraway land—completely hinges on our
capacity to create and maintain solid, dependable networks.
And those vitally important networks come in all shapes and
sizes—ranging from small and simple to humongous and super
complicated. But whatever their flavor, they all need to be
maintained properly, and to do that well, you have to
understand networking basics. The various types of devices
and technologies that are used to create networks, as well as
how they work together, is what this book is about, and I'll go
through this critical information one step at a time with you.
Understanding all of this will not only equip you with a rocksolid base to build on as you gain IT knowledge and grow in
your career, it will also arm you with what you'll need to ace
the Network+ certification exam!
To find Todd Lammle CompTIA videos
and practice questions, please see www.lammle.com .
First Things First: What's a Network?
The dictionary defines the word network as “a group or system
of interconnected people or things.” Similarly, in the computer
world, the term network means two or more connected
computers that can share resources such as data and
applications, office machines, an Internet connection, or some
combination of these, as shown in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1 shows a really basic network made up of only two
host computers connected; they share resources such as files
and even a printer hooked up to one of the hosts. These two
hosts “talk” to each other using a computer language called
binary code, which consists of lots of 1s and 0s in a specific
order that describes exactly what they want to “say.”
Next, I'm going to tell you about local area networks, how they
work, and even how we can connect local area networks
together. Then, later in this chapter, I'll describe how to
connect remote local area networks together through
something known as a wide area network.
FIGURE 1.1 A basic network
The Local Area Network
Just as the name implies, a local area network (LAN) is usually
restricted to spanning a particular geographic location such as
an office building, a single department within a corporate
office, or even a home office.
Back in the day, you couldn't put more than 30 workstations on
a LAN, and you had to cope with strict limitations on how far
those machines could actually be from each other. Because of
technological advances, all that's changed now, and we're not
nearly as restricted in regard to both a LAN's size and the
distance a LAN can span. Even so, it's still best to split a big
LAN into smaller logical zones known as workgroups to make
administration easier.
The meaning of the term workgroup in
this context is slightly different than when the term is used
in contrast to domains. In that context, a workgroup is a set
of devices with no security association with one another
(whereas in a domain they do have that association). In this
context, we simply mean they physically are in the same
network segment.
In a typical business environment, it's a good idea to arrange
your LAN's workgroups along department divisions; for
instance, you would create a workgroup for Accounting,
another one for Sales, and maybe another for Marketing—you
get the idea. Figure 1.2 shows two separate LANs, each as its
own workgroup.
First, don't stress about the devices labeled hub and switch—
these are just connectivity devices that allow hosts to
physically connect to resources on an LAN. Trust me; I'll
describe them to you in much more detail in Chapter 5,
“Networking Devices.”
Anyway, back to the figure. Notice that there's a Marketing
workgroup and a Sales workgroup. These are LANs in their
most basic form. Any device that connects to the Marketing
LAN can access the resources of the Marketing LAN—in this
case, the servers and printer.
FIGURE 1.2 Two separate LANs (workgroups)
There are two problems with this:
• You must be physically connected to a workgroup's LAN to
get the resources from it.
• You can't get from one LAN to the other LAN and use the
server data and printing resources remotely.
This is a typical network issue that's easily resolved by using a
cool device called a router to connect the two LANs, as shown
in Figure 1.3.
FIGURE 1.3 A router connects LANs
Nice—problem solved! Even though you can use routers for
more than just connecting LANs, the router shown in Figure
1.3 is a great solution because the host computers from the
Sales LAN can get to the resources (server data and printers) of
the Marketing LAN, and vice versa.
Now, you might be thinking that we really don't need the
router—that we could just physically connect the two
workgroups with a type of cable that would allow the
Marketing and Sales workgroups to hook up somehow. Well,
we could do that, but if we did, we would have only one big,
cumbersome workgroup instead of separate workgroups for
Marketing and Sales, and that kind of arrangement just isn't
practical for today's networks.
This is because with smaller, individual-yet-connected groups,
the users on each LAN enjoy much faster response times when
accessing resources, and administrative tasks are a lot easier
too. Larger workgroups run more slowly because there's a
legion of hosts within them that are all trying to get to the same
resources simultaneously. So the router shown in Figure 1.3,
which separates the workgroups while still allowing access
between them, is a really great solution!
Don't focus too much on the network
connectivity devices like the hubs, routers, and switches I've
mentioned so far in this chapter yet. We'll thoroughly cover
them all later, in Chapter 5. Right now, I really want you to
prioritize your understanding of the concepts that I'm
presenting here, so at this point, all you need to know is that
hubs and switches are devices that connect other devices
together into a network, and routers connect networks
together.
So let me define the other terms I've used so far: workstations,
servers, and hosts.
Common Network Components
There are a lot of different machines, devices, and media that
make up our networks. Let's talk about three of the most
common:
• Workstations
• Servers
• Hosts
Workstations
Workstations are often seriously powerful computers that run
more than one central processing unit (CPU) and whose
resources are available to other users on the network to access
when needed. With this much power, you might think I am
describing a server—not quite, because there is an important
difference between these devices that I'll cover in the next
section. Workstations are often employed as systems that end
users use on a daily basis. Don't confuse workstations with
client machines, which can be workstations but not always.
People often use the terms workstation and client
interchangeably. In colloquial terms, this isn't a big deal; we all
do it. But technically speaking, they are different. A client
machine is any device on the network that can ask for access to
resources like a printer or other hosts from a server or
powerful workstation.
The terms workstation, client, and host
can sometimes be used interchangeably. Computers have
become more and more powerful, and the terms have
become somewhat fuzzy because hosts can be clients,
workstations, servers, and more! The term host is used to
describe pretty much anything that takes an IP address.
Servers
Servers are also powerful computers. They get their name
because they truly are “at the service” of the network and run
specialized software known as the network operating system
to maintain and control the network.
In a good design that optimizes the network's performance,
servers are highly specialized and are there to handle one
important labor-intensive job. This is not to say that a single
server can't do many jobs, but more often than not, you'll get
better performance if you dedicate a server to a single task.
Here's a list of common dedicated servers:
File Server Stores and dispenses files
Mail Server The network's post office; handles email
functions
Print Server Manages printers on the network
Web Server Manages web-based activities by running
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) for storing web
content and accessing web pages
Fax Server The “memo maker” that sends and receives
paperless faxes over the network
Application Server Manages network applications
Telephony Server Handles the call center and call routing
and can be thought of as a sophisticated network answering
machine
Proxy Server Handles tasks in the place of other machines
on the network, particularly an Internet connection
See how the name of each kind of server
indicates what it actually does—how it serves the network?
This is an excellent way to remember them.
As I said, servers are usually dedicated to doing one specific
important thing within the network. Not always, though—
sometimes they have more than one job. But whether servers
are designated for one job or are network multitaskers, they
can maintain the network's data integrity by backing up the
network's software and providing redundant hardware (for
fault tolerance). And no matter what, they all serve a number
of client machines.
Back in Figure 1.2, I showed you an example of two really
simple LAN networks. I want to make sure you know that
servers must have considerably superior CPUs, hard-drive
space, and memory—a lot more than a simple client's capacity
—because they serve many client machines and provide any
resources they require. Because they're so important, you
should always put your servers in a very secure area. My
company's servers are in a locked server room because not
only are they really pricey workhorses, they also store huge
amounts of important and sensitive company data, so they
need to be kept safe from any unauthorized access.
In Figure 1.4, you can see a network populated with both
workstations and servers. Also notice that the hosts can access
the servers across the network, which is pretty much the
general idea of having a network in the first place!
FIGURE 1.4 A network populated with servers and workstations
You probably picked up on the fact that there are more
workstations here than servers, right? Think of why that is. If
you answered that it's because one server can provide
resources to what can sometimes be a huge number of
individual users at the same time but workstations don't, you
nailed it!
Hosts
This can be kind of confusing because when people refer to
hosts, they really can be referring to almost any type of
networking devices—including workstations and servers. But
if you dig a bit deeper, you'll find that usually this term comes
up when people are talking about resources and jobs that have
to do with Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol
(TCP/IP). The scope of possible machines and devices is so
broad because, in TCP/IP-speak, host means any network
device with an IP address. Yes, you'll hear IT professionals
throw this term around pretty loosely; for the Network+ exam,
stick to the definition being network devices, including
workstations and servers, with IP addresses.
Here's a bit of background: The name host harks back to the
Jurassic period of networking when those dinosaurs known as
mainframes were the only intelligent devices able to roam the
network. These were called hosts whether they had TCP/IP
functionality or not. In that bygone age, everything else in the
network-scape was referred to as dumb terminals because only
mainframes—hosts—were given IP addresses. Another
fossilized term from way back then is gateways, which was
used to talk about any layer 3 machines like routers. We still
use these terms today, but they've evolved a bit to refer to the
many intelligent devices populating our present-day networks,
each of which has an IP address. This is exactly the reason you
hear host used so broadly.
Network Types
When we refer to parts of our network, we classify the sections
of the network with a type. This designation of a particular
type helps us generalize its use and function. Some of these
designation types can use various technologies for
connectivity, and some use specific technologies. In the
following sections are several different network types that you
may see as a network professional.
Metropolitan Area Network
A metropolitan area network (MAN) is just as it sounds, a
network covering a metropolitan area used to interconnect
various buildings and facilities usually over a carrier provider
network. Think of a MAN as a concentrated WAN and you've
got it. MANs typically offer high-speed interconnections using
in-ground fiber optics and can be very cost effective for highspeed interconnects.
A carrier provider network is typically a
leased network connection. These providers will lease lines
between two or more networks to provide connectivity.
Wide Area Network
There are legions of people who, if asked to define a wide area
network (WAN), just couldn't do it. Yet most of them use the big
dog of all WANs—the Internet—every day! With that in mind,
you can imagine that WAN networks are what we use to span
large geographic areas and truly go the distance. Like the
Internet, WANs usually employ both routers and public links,
so that's generally the criteria used to define them.
Here are some of the important ways that WANs are different
from LANs:
• WANs usually need a router port or ports.
• WANs span larger geographic areas and/or can link
disparate locations.
• WANs are usually slower.
• We can choose when and how long we connect to a WAN. A
LAN is all or nothing—our workstation is connected to it
either permanently or not at all, although most of us have
dedicated WAN links now.
• WANs can utilize either private or public data transport
media such as phone lines.
We get the word Internet from the term internetwork. An
internetwork is a type of LAN and/or WAN that connects a
bunch of networks, or intranets. In an internetwork, hosts still
use hardware addresses to communicate with other hosts on
the LAN. However, they use logical addresses (IP addresses) to
communicate with hosts on a different LAN (other side of the
router).
And routers are the devices that make this possible. Each
connection into a router is a different logical network. Figure
1.5 demonstrates how routers are employed to create an
internetwork and how they enable our LANs to access WAN
resources.
FIGURE 1.5 An internetwork
The Internet is a prime example of what's known as a
distributed WAN—an internetwork that's made up of a lot of
interconnected computers located in a lot of different places.
There's another kind of WAN, referred to as centralized, that's
composed of a main, centrally located computer or location
that remote computers and devices can connect to. A good
example is remote offices that connect to a main corporate
office, as shown in Figure 1.5.
Personal Area Network
For close proximity connections there are PANs, or personal
area networks. These are seen with smartphones and laptops
in a conference room where local connections are used to
collaborate and send data between devices. While a PAN can
use a wired connection such as Ethernet or USB, it is more
common that short distance wireless connections are used
such as Bluetooth, infrared, or ZigBee.
PANs are intended for close proximity between devices such as
connecting to a projector, printer, or a co-worker's computer
and extend usually only a few meters.
Campus Area Network
A CAN, or campus area network, covers a limited geographical
network such as a college or corporate campus. The CAN
typically interconnects LANs in various buildings and offers a
Wi-Fi component for roaming users.
A campus area network is between a LAN and WAN in scope.
They are larger than a local area network but smaller than a
metropolitan area network or wide area network.
Most CANs offer Internet connectivity as well as access to data
center resources.
Storage Area Network
A storage area network (SAN) is designed for, and used
exclusively by, storage systems. SANs interconnect servers to
storage arrays containing centralized banks of hard drive or
similar storage media. SANs are usually found only in data
centers and do not mix traffic with other LANs. The protocols
are designed specifically for storage, with Fibre Channel being
the most prevalent along with iSCSI. The network hardware is
different from LAN switches and routers and is designed
specifically to carry storage traffic.
Fibre Channel over Ethernet (FCoE) is a
technology that encapsulates Fibre Channel over Ethernet.
The protocol is typically used as a transitional technology
until the next generation of equipment can support iSCSI.
The sweet spot to FCoE is that you can use existing Ethernet
infrastructure.
Software-Defined Wide Area Network
A software-defined wide area network (SDWAN) is a virtual
WAN architecture that uses software to manage connectivity,
devices, and services and can make changes in the network
based on current operations.
SDWANs integrate any type of transport architectures such as
MPLS, LTE, and broadband Internet services to securely
connect users to applications. The SDWAN controller can make
changes in real time to add or remove bandwidth or route
around failed circuits. SDWANs can simplify wide area
networking management and operations by decoupling the
networking hardware from its control mechanism.
Multiprotocol Label Switching
The term Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS), as used in this
chapter, will define the actual layout of what is one of the most
popular WAN protocols in use today. MPLS has become one of
the most innovative and flexible networking technologies on
the market, and it has some key advantages over other WAN
technologies:
• Physical layout flexibility
• Prioritizing of data
• Redundancy in case of link failure
• One-to-many connection
MPLS is a switching mechanism that imposes labels (numbers)
to data and then uses those labels to forward data when it
arrives at the MPLS network, as shown in Figure 1.6.
FIGURE 1.6 Multiprotocol Label Switching layout
The labels are assigned on the edge of the MPLS network, and
forwarding inside the MPLS network (cloud) is done solely
based on labels through virtual links instead of physical links.
Prioritizing data is a huge advantage; for example, voice data
could have priority over basic data based on the labels. And
since there are multiple paths for the data to be forwarded
through the MPLS cloud, there's even some redundancy
provided as well.
Multipoint Generic Routing Encapsulation
The Multipoint Generic Routing Encapsulation (mGRE) protocol
refers to a carrier or service provider offering that dynamically
creates and terminates connections to nodes on a network.
mGRE is used in Dynamic Multipoint VPN deployments. The
protocol enables dynamic connections without having to preconfigure static tunnel endpoints.
The protocol encapsulates user data, creates a VPN connection
to one or many nodes, and, when completed, tears down the
connection.
Network Architecture: Peer-to-Peer or Client-Server?
We've developed networking as a way to share resources and
information, and how that's achieved directly maps to the
particular architecture of the network operating system
software. There are two main network types you need to know
about: peer-to-peer and client-server. And by the way, it's
really tough to tell the difference just by looking at a diagram
or even by checking out a live video of the network humming
along. However, the differences between peer-to-peer and
client-server architectures are pretty major. They're not just
physical; they're logical differences. You'll see what I mean in a
bit.
Peer-to-Peer Networks
Computers connected in peer-to-peer networks do not have any
central or special authority—they're all peers, meaning that
when it comes to authority, they're all equals. The authority to
perform a security check for proper access rights lies with the
computer that has the desired resource being requested from
it.
It also means that the computers coexisting in a peer-to-peer
network can be client machines that access resources and
server machines and provide those resources to other
computers. This actually works pretty well as long as there isn't
a huge number of users on the network, if each user backs
things up locally, and if your network doesn't require much
security.
If your network is running Windows, macOS, or Linux in a
local LAN workgroup, you have a peer-to-peer network. Figure
1.7 gives you a snapshot of a typical peer-to-peer network.
Keep in mind that peer-to-peer networks definitely present
security-oriented challenges; for instance, just backing up
company data can get pretty sketchy!
FIGURE 1.7 A peer-to-peer network
Since it should be clear by now that peer-to-peer networks
aren't all sunshine, backing up all your critical data may be
tough, but it's vital! Haven't all of us forgotten where we've put
an important file? And then there's that glaring security issue
to tangle with. Because security is not centrally governed, each
and every user has to remember and maintain a list of users
and passwords on each and every machine. Worse, some of
those all-important passwords for the same users change on
different machines—even for accessing different resources.
What a mess!
Client-Server Networks
Client-server networks are pretty much the polar opposite of
peer-to-peer networks because in them, a single server uses a
network operating system for managing the whole network.
Here's how it works: A client machine's request for a resource
goes to the main server, which responds by handling security
and directing the client to the desired resource. This happens
instead of the request going directly to the machine with the
desired resource, and it has some serious advantages. First,
because the network is much better organized and doesn't
depend on users remembering where needed resources are,
it's a whole lot easier to find the files you need because
everything is stored in one spot—on that special server. Your
security also gets a lot tighter because all usernames and
passwords are on that specific server, which is never ever used
as a workstation. You even gain scalability because clientserver networks can have legions of workstations on them.
And surprisingly, with all those demands, the network's
performance is actually optimized—nice!
Check out Figure 1.8, which shows a client-server network with
a server that has a database of access rights, user accounts, and
passwords.
FIGURE 1.8 A client-server network
Many of today's networks are ideally a healthy blend of peerto-peer and client-server architectures, with carefully specified
servers that permit the simultaneous sharing of resources from
devices running workstation operating systems. Even though
the supporting machines can't handle as many inbound
connections at a time, they still run the server service
reasonably well. And if this type of mixed environment is
designed well, most networks benefit greatly by having the
capacity to take advantage of the positive aspects of both
worlds.
EXERCISE 1.1
IDENTIFYING COMMON NETWORK COMPONENTS
This exercise will help you identify common network
components in your daily life. You will list all of the servers,
clients, and how they are accessed in three columns.
1. Using the knowledge in this section, list all of the
possible servers that you communicate with daily.
2. Next to each of the servers, list the client application that
accesses each of the servers.
3. Next to each client application, list the client (device)
that runs the client application (cell phone, workstation,
etc.).
4. Next list all of the connectivity methods used to connect
the clients (devices) to the servers.
The list you compiled should give you a good understanding
of the various clients, servers, and connectivity methods in
your day-to-day life.
Physical Network Topologies
Just as a topographical map is a type of map that shows the
shape of the terrain, the physical topology of a network is also a
type of map. It defines the specific characteristics of a network,
such as where all the workstations and other devices are
located and the precise arrangement of all the physical media
such as cables. Now, even though these two topologies are
usually a lot alike, a particular network can actually have
physical and logical topologies that are very different.
Basically, what you want to remember is that a network's
physical topology gives you the lay of the land, and the logical
topology shows how a digital signal or data navigates through
that layout.
Here are the topologies you're most likely to run into these
days:
• Bus
• Star/hub-and-spoke
• Ring
• Mesh
• Point-to-point
• Point-to-multipoint
• Hybrid
Bus Topology
This type of topology is the most basic one of the bunch, and it
really does sort of resemble a bus, but more like one that's
been in a wreck! Anyway, the bus topology consists of two
distinct and terminated ends, with each of its computers
connecting to one unbroken cable running its entire length.
Back in the day, we used to attach computers to that main
cable with wire taps, but this didn't work all that well so we
began using drop cables in their place. If we were dealing with
10Base2 Ethernet, we would slip a connector called a “T” into
the main cable anywhere we wanted to connect a device to it
instead of using drop cables.
Figure 1.9 depicts what a typical bus network's physical
topology looks like.
FIGURE 1.9 A typical bus network's physical topology
Even though all the computers on this kind of network see all
the data flowing through the cable, only the one computer,
which the data is specifically addressed to, actually gets the
data. Some of the benefits of using a bus topology are that it's
easy to install, and it's not very expensive, partly because it
doesn't require as much cable as the other types of physical
topologies. But it also has some drawbacks: For instance, it's
hard to troubleshoot, change, or move, and it really doesn't
offer much in the way of fault tolerance because everything is
connected to that single cable. This means that any fault in the
cable would basically bring down the whole network!
By the way, fault tolerance is the
capability of a computer or a network system to respond to
a condition automatically, often resolving it, which reduces
the impact on the system. If fault-tolerance measures have
been implemented correctly on a network, it's highly
unlikely that any of that network's users will know that a
problem ever existed at all.
Star Topology
A star (hub-and-spoke) topology's computers are connected to a
central point with their own individual cables or wireless
connections. You'll often find that central spot inhabited by a
device like a hub, a switch, or an access point.
Star topology offers lots of advantages over bus topology,
making it more widely used even though it obviously requires
more physical media. One of its best features is that because
each computer or network segment is connected to the central
device individually, if the cable fails, it brings down only the
machine or network segment related to the point of failure.
This makes the network much more fault-tolerant as well as a
lot easier to troubleshoot. Another great thing about a star
topology is that it's a lot more scalable—all you have to do if
you want to add to it is run a new cable and connect to the
machine at the core of the star. In Figure 1.10, you'll find a
great example of a typical star topology.
FIGURE 1.10 Typical star topology with a switch
Although it is called a star (hub-and-spoke) topology, it also
looks a lot like a bike wheel with spokes connecting to the hub
in the middle of the wheel and extending outward to connect
to the rim. And just as with that bike wheel, it's the hub device,
actually more often a switch today, at the center of a star
topology network that can give you the most grief if something
goes wrong with it. If that central hub or switch happens to
fail, down comes the whole network, so it's a very good thing
hubs/switches don't fail often!
Just as it is with pretty much everything, a star topology has its
pros and cons. But the good news far outweighs the bad, which
is why people often opt for star topology. And here's a list of
benefits you gain by going with it:
• New stations can be added or moved easily and quickly.
• A single cable failure won't bring down the entire network.
• It's relatively easy to troubleshoot.
And here are the disadvantages to using a star topology:
• The total installation cost can be higher because of the
larger number of cables, even though prices have become
more competitive.
• It has a single point of failure—the hub or other central
device such as a switch.
There are two more sophisticated implementations of a star
topology. The first is called a point-to-point link, where you
have not only the device in the center of the spoke acting as a
hub but also the device on the other end, which extends the
network. This is still a star-wired topology, but as I'm sure you
can imagine, it gives you a lot more scalability!
Another refined version is the wireless version, but to
understand this variety well, you've got to have a solid grasp of
all the capabilities and features of any devices populating the
wireless star topology. No worries, though—I'll be covering
wireless access points later in Chapter 12, “Wireless
Networking.” For now, it's good enough for you to know that
access points are pretty much just wireless hubs or switches
that behave like their wired counterparts. They create a point-
by-point connection to endpoints and other wireless access
points.
Ring Topology
In this type of topology, each computer is directly connected to
other computers within the same network. Looking at Figure
1.11, you can see that the network's data flows from computer
to computer back to the source, with the network's primary
cable forming a ring. The problem is, the ring topology has a lot
in common with the bus topology because if you want to add to
the network, you have no choice but to break the cable ring,
which is likely to bring down the entire network!
This is one big reason that ring topology isn't very popular—
you just won't run into it a lot as I did in the 1980s and early
1990s. It's also pricey because you need several cables to
connect each computer, it's really hard to reconfigure, and as
you've probably guessed, it's not fault-tolerant.
But even with all that being said, if you work at an Internet
service provider (ISP), you may still find a physical ring
topology in use for a technology called SONET or some other
WAN technology. However, you won't find any LANs in
physical rings anymore.
Although the ring topology is not used in
LANs today, you will see the ring topology implemented
with WAN providers.
FIGURE 1.11 A typical ring topology
Mesh Topology
In this type of topology, you'll find that there's a path from
every machine to every other one in the network. That's a lot
of connections—in fact, the mesh topology wins the prize for
“most physical connections per device”! You won't find it used
in LANs very often, if ever, these days, but you will find a
modified version of it known as a hybrid mesh used in a
restrained manner on WANs, including the Internet.
Often, hybrid mesh topology networks will have quite a few
connections between certain places to create redundancy
(backup). And other types of topologies can sometimes be
found in the mix too, which is another reason it's dubbed
hybrid. Just remember that it isn't a full-on mesh topology if
there isn't a connection between all devices in the network.
And understand that it's fairly complicated. Figure 1.12 gives
you a great picture of how much only four connections can
complicate things!
You can clearly see that everything gets more and more
complex as both the wiring and the connections multiply. For
each n locations or hosts, you end up with n(n–1)/2
connections. This means that in a network consisting of only
four computers, you have 4(4–1)/2, or 6 connections. And if that
little network grows to, say, a population of 10 computers,
you'll then have a whopping 45 connections to cope with!
That's a huge amount of overhead, so only small networks can
really use this topology and manage it well. On the bright side,
you get a really nice level of fault tolerance, but mesh still isn't
used in corporate LANs anymore because it is so complicated
to manage.
FIGURE 1.12 A typical mesh topology
A full mesh physical topology is least
likely to have a collision, which happens when the data
from two hosts trying to communicate simultaneously
“collides” and gets lost.
This is also the reason you'll usually find the hybrid version in
today's WANs. In fact, the mesh topology is actually pretty rare
now, but it's still used because of the robust fault tolerance it
offers. Because you have a multitude of connections, if one
goes on the blink, computers and other network devices can
simply switch to one of the many redundant connections that
are up and running. And clearly, all that cabling in the mesh
topology makes it a very pricey implementation. Plus, you can
make your network management much less insane than it is
with mesh by using what's known as a partial mesh topology
solution instead, so why not go that way? You may lose a little
fault tolerance, but if you go the partial mesh route, you still
get to use the same technology between all the network's
devices. Just remember that with partial mesh, not all devices
will be interconnected, so it's important to choose the ones that
will be wisely.
Point-to-Point Topology
As its name implies, in a point-to-point topology you have a
direct connection between two routers or switches, giving you
one communication path. The routers in a point-to-point
topology can be linked by a serial cable, making it a physical
network, or if they're located far apart and connected only via
a circuit within a Frame Relay or MPLS network, it's a logical
network instead.
Figure 1.13 illustrates three examples of a typical T1, or WAN,
point-to-point connection.
FIGURE 1.13 Three point-to-point connections
What you see here is a lightning bolt and a couple of round
things with a bunch of arrows projecting from them, right?
Well, the two round things radiating arrows represent our
network's two routers, and that lightning bolt represents a
WAN link. These symbols are industry standard, and I'll be
using them throughout this book, so it's a good idea to get used
to them!
So, the second part of the diagram shows two computers
connected by a cable—a point-to-point link. By the way, this
should remind you of something we just went over. Remember
peer-to-peer networks? Good! I hope you also remember that a
big drawback to peer-to-peer network sharing is that it's not
very scalable. With this in mind, you probably won't be all that
surprised that even if both machines have a wireless point-topoint connection, this network still won't be very scalable.
You'll usually find point-to-point networks within many of
today's WANs, and as you can see in the third part of Figure
1.13, a link from a computer to a hub or switch is also a valid
point-to-point connection. A common version of this setup
consists of a direct wireless link between two wireless bridges
that's used to connect computers in two different buildings
together.
Point-to-Multipoint Topology
Again as the name suggests, a point-to-multipoint topology
consists of a succession of connections between an interface on
one router and multiple destination routers—one point of
connection to multiple points of connection. Each of the
routers and every one of their interfaces involved in the pointto-multipoint connection are part of the same network.
Figure 1.14 shows a WAN and demonstrates a point-tomultipoint network. You can clearly see a single, corporate
router connecting to multiple branches.
FIGURE 1.14 A point-to-multipoint network, example 1
Figure 1.15 shows another prime example of a point-tomultipoint network: a college or corporate campus.
FIGURE 1.15 A point-to-multipoint network, example 2
Hybrid Topology
I know I just talked about the hybrid network topology in the
section about mesh topology, but I didn't give you a mental
picture of it in the form of a figure. I also want to point out that
hybrid topology means just that—a combination of two or more
types of physical or logical network topologies working
together within the same network.
Figure 1.16 depicts a hybrid network topology; it shows a few
LANs connected by switches in a star topology configuration.
The LANs are connected in a full mesh, which is connected to a
router and a WAN link on a counter-rotating ring network.
FIGURE 1.16 A hybrid network
Topology Selection, Backbones, and
Segments
Now that you're familiar with many different types of network
topologies, you're ready for some tips on selecting the right one
for your particular network. You also need to know about
backbones and segments, which I'll cover in the very last part
of this chapter.
REAL WORLD SCENARIO
THEY'RE JUST CABLES, RIGHT?
Wrong! Regardless of the type of network you build, you
need to start thinking about quality at the bottom and work
up.
Think of it as if you were at an electronics store buying the
cables for your home theater system. You've already spent a
bunch of time and money getting the right components to
meet your needs. Because you've probably parted with a
hefty chunk of change, you might be tempted to cut corners,
but why would you stop now and connect all your highquality devices together with the cable equivalent of twine?
No, you're smarter than that—you know that the exact
cables that will maximize the sound and picture quality of
your specific components can also protect them!
It's the same thing when you're faced with selecting the
physical media for a specific network. You just don't want to
cut corners here because this is the backbone of the
network and you definitely don't want to be faced with
going through the costly pain of replacing this
infrastructure once it's been installed. Doing that will cost
you a lot more than taking the time to wisely choose the
right cables and spending the money it takes to get them in
the first place. The network downtime alone can cost a
company a bundle! Another reason for choosing the
network's physical media well is that it will be there for a
good 5 to 10 years. This means two things: It better be solid
quality, and it better be scalable because that network will
grow and change over the years.
Selecting the Right Topology
As you now know, not only do you have a buffet of network
topologies to choose from, but each one also has pros and cons
to implementing it. But it really comes down to that wellknown adage “Ask the right questions.” First, how much cash
do you have? How much fault tolerance and security do you
really need? Also, is this network likely to grow like a weed—
will you need to quickly and easily reconfigure it often? In
other words, how scalable does your network need to be?
For instance, if your challenge is to design a nice, cost-effective
solution that involves only a few computers in a room, getting
a wireless access point and some wireless network cards is
definitely your best way to go because you won't need to part
with the cash for a bunch of cabling and it's super easy to set
up. Alternatively, suppose you're faced with coming up with a
solid design for a growing company's already-large network. In
that case, you're probably good to go with using a wired star
topology because it will nicely allow for future changes.
Remember, a star topology really shines when it comes to
making additions to the network, moving things around, and
making any changes happen quickly, efficiently, and costeffectively.
If, say, you're hired to design a network for an ISP that needs to
be up and running 99.9% of the time with no more than eight
hours a year allowed downtime, well, you need Godzillastrength fault tolerance. Do you remember which topology
gives that up the best? (Hint: Internet.) Your primo solution is
to go with either a hybrid or a partial mesh topology.
Remember that partial mesh leaves you with a subset of n(n–
1)/2 connections to maintain—a number that could very well
blow a big hole in your maintenance budget!
Here's a list of things to keep in mind when you're faced with
coming up with the right topology for the right network:
• Cost
• Ease of installation
• Ease of maintenance
• Fault-tolerance requirement
• Security requirement
The Network Backbone
Today's networks can get pretty complicated, so we need to
have a standard way of communicating with each other
intelligibly about exactly which part of the network we're
referencing. This is the reason we divide networks into
different parts called backbones and segments.
Figure 1.17 illustrates a network and shows which part is the
backbone and which parts are segments.
FIGURE 1.17 Backbone and segments on a network
You can see that the network backbone is actually kind of like
our own human backbone. It's what all the network segments
and servers connect to and what gives the network its
structure. As you can imagine, being such an important nerve
center, the backbone must use some kind of seriously fast,
robust technology—often Gigabit Ethernet or faster. And to
optimize network performance—its speed and efficiency—it
follows that you would want to connect all of the network's
servers and segments directly to the network's backbone.
Network Segments
When we refer to a segment, we can mean any small section of
the network that may be connected to, but isn't actually a piece
of, the backbone. The network's workstations and servers
organized into segments connect to the network backbone,
which is the common connecting point for all segments; you
can see this by taking another look at Figure 1.17, which
displays four segments.
Service-Related Entry Points
In the networking world, clearly defined boundaries exist
where one entity hands off a connection to another. These are
common when connecting to a service provider's or carrier's
WAN circuit.
The service entry point defines the point of responsibility. The
common term used is the demarcation point, or demarc for
short. A carrier will usually terminate with a piece of
equipment called a smart jack that allows them to run
diagnostics up to the physical point where the customer's
network connects.
Service Provider Links
Service providers are ISPs and cable and telephone companies
that provide networking services. There are many different
technologies used to provide these services such as satellite
links for earth station to satellite connections.
Traditional telephone companies may have extensive copper
connections to homes and businesses that use digital
subscriber lines (DSL) to provide last-hop, high-speed digital
services. DSL used to be a popular method to connect to the
Internet and a solid alternative to cable or fiber connections.
Cable companies now offer data and Internet services over
their hybrid fiber/coax networks in addition to their traditional
video offerings. A cable modem is installed at the customer's
site and provides data, video, and voice services off the cable
network.
Another common link is the leased line. When the provider
installs a leased line, it is either a copper or fiber termination
that interconnects two endpoints and is exclusive to the
customer; there is no shared bandwidth, and leased lines are
very secure as they are dedicated for the customer's use.
Virtual Networking
Just as the server world has been moving to virtualized
processes, so has the network world. It is now common to
provide networking services without deploying a hardware
switch or router; it is all done in software! Companies such as
VMware offer virtual switch (vSwitch) technology that provides
the Ethernet switched and routing functions on the hypervisor,
eliminating the need for external networking hardware. A
vSwitch can operate and be configured the same as an external
hardware appliance; just remember, a vSwitch is similar to
software virtualization.
Virtualized servers do not have the means for inserting a
hardware network interface card since they exist only in
software. A virtual network interface card (vNIC) is installed to
connect the virtual device to the hypervisor and, from there,
out to the LAN.
Network function virtualization (NFV) is the process of taking
networking functions such as routers, switches, firewalls, load
balancers, and controllers and virtualizing them. This process
allows all of these functions to run on a single device.
The magic behind all of the virtual networking popularity is
the hypervisor. The hypervisor is software that is installed
directly on a bare-metal server and allows for many virtual
machines (VMs) to run, thinking they are using the server's
hardware directly. This allows for many servers and virtual
network devices to run on a single piece of computing
hardware.
We will cover network virtualization in
Chapter 17, “Data Center Architecture and Cloud Concepts.”
Three-Tiered Model
The three-tiered networking model was introduced more than
20 years ago by Cisco, and it's been the gold-standard for
network design. Even though it was introduced so long ago, it
is still very much valid today for any hardware vendor.
However, in today's small to midsize network designs, the
collapsed-core model has been adopted to save the expense of
additional network switching, as shown in Figure 1.18. The
elements of both models are similar in function.
FIGURE 1.18 Three-tier versus collapsed-core model
Core Layer The core layer is also considered the backbone of
the network. It is where you will find connectivity between
geographic areas with WAN lines. It should be designed for
high availability and only provides routing and switching of
the entire network. Nothing should be done at the core layer to
slow it down!
Distribution Layer The distribution layer is often referred to
as the workgroup layer or the aggregation layer because it
allows for connectivity to multiple access layer switches. The
distribution layer is where the control plane is located and is
where packet filtering, security policies, routing between
VLANs, and defining of broadcast domains are performed. You
can think of it as the distribution of switching from the core to
the access layer.
Access Layer The access layer is often referred to as the edge
switching layer, and it connects the end-user hosts. The access
layer provides local switching and the creation of collision
domains. It is simply designed for access to the network and it
is where support begins for quality of service (QoS), power
over Ethernet (PoE), and security.
The collapsed-core model was adopted to save cost and
complexity in networks. With the powerful switching of today,
we can support both the core layer and the distribution layer
on the same piece of network switching equipment. It still
performs the same functions as the core and distribution layer;
it is just collapsed into one piece of switching equipment.
Spine and Leaf
The concept of spine-leaf switching is often referred to as a
CLOS network, named after Charles Clos, who formalized the
concept in 1938 of multistage circuit-switching. Spine-leaf
switching creates a two-tier circuit-switched network.
With the expansion of both private and public data centers and
the adoption of virtualization, a switching technology was
needed that didn't fit the classic three-tier model. When we talk
about virtualization, we should be open-minded that it could
mean the virtualization of servers, clients, storage,
applications, and just about anything you can think of that can
be partitioned over many hosts. The classic three-tier and
collapsed-core models work well in physical campus networks
and enterprise networks; access switches provide a star
topology to connect hosts on a one-to-one computer to port
basis (sometimes two-to-one, if you employ VoIP phones, but I
digress). This classic model does not do well in the data center.
Spine and leaf switching provides extremely fast networking
switching, and it is almost exclusively used in data center
network architecture. The concept is simple: Create a very fast
and redundant backbone (spline) that is used only to connect
leaf switches. The leaf switches in turn connect the hosts
(servers) in the data center. A leaf switch will never directly
talk to another leaf switch; it will always need to talk through
the backbone or spine of the network. Servers will never be
connected to the spine of the network directly. Servers are
always connected through a leaf switch. Figure 1.19 shows a
typical spine-leaf network.
FIGURE 1.19 A typical spine-leaf network
As you can see in Figure 1.19, the Spine A switch is connected
to every leaf switch, and the Spine B switch is connected to
every leaf switch. This allows extremely fast switching
between Leaf 1 and Leaf 4 as well as any other leaf switch.
Switching between two leaf switches is always two hops away
no matter where they are in the network. It will traverse to the
spine switch and then to the destination leaf switch.
Traffic Flow
Understanding traffic flow through your networks is
important. But why? Why would you need to understand
which type and direction the traffic flows through your
network?
There are many reasons, but the most important, and the one
we'll concentrate on here, is security.
Figure 1.20 shows the two essential points in your network to
verify traffic flow, and both flows are important to understand
so you know where you'll secure your data. The locations are
north-south traffic flow and east-west traffic flow.
At first, the most important point for security will be the northsouth traffic because data is flowing to and from your
enterprise network to the outside Internet. However, this
doesn't mean you should not take east-west traffic security
seriously.
Let's define these two areas:
North-South Looking at Figure 1.20, we can see the traffic
found here entering and leaving your internal network. Tight
security in this location is essential. The southbound traffic
enters through a firewall and routers. Northbound traffic is
routed from your internal network to the Internet.
East-West East-west traffic is still important to understand
that many types of attacks, particularly from the inside, must
be taken seriously. You need to inspect the lateral traffic
coming between server farms and data centers. There is a large
amount of traffic here, and some examples of east-west data
transfer are database replication, file transfers, and
interprocess communication.
FIGURE 1.20 Understanding traffic flow in your network
Summary
This chapter created a solid foundation for you to build your
networking knowledge on as you go through this book.
You also learned that the components required to build a
network aren't all you need. Understanding the various types
of network connection methods, such as peer-to-peer and
client-server, is also vital.
Further, you learned about the various types of logical and
physical network topologies and the features and drawbacks of
each. I wrapped up the chapter with a discussion about
network virtualization and equipped you with the right
questions to ask yourself to ensure that you come up with the
right network topology for your networking needs.
Exam Essentials
Know your network topologies. Know the names and
descriptions of the topologies. Be aware of the difference
between physical networks (what humans see) and logical
networks (what the equipment “sees”).
Know the advantages and disadvantages of the topologies.
It is essential to know what each topology brings to the table.
Knowing the various characteristics of each topology comes in
handy during troubleshooting.
Understand the terms LAN and WAN. You need to
understand when you would use a LAN and when you would
use a WAN. A LAN is used to connect a group of hosts, and a
WAN is used to connect various LANs.
Know the three-tiered model and collapsed core. Know
what the core, distribution, and access layer provide in the
three-tier model. The collapsed core is used to reduce costs by
collapsing the core and distribution tiers into one tier.
Understand the differences between north-south traffic
and east-west traffic. North-south traffic typically leaves the
network through a routed connection. East-west traffic
typically resides in the immediate network.
Written Lab
You can find the answers to the written labs in Appendix A. Fill
in in the blank with the term that best fits the statement.
1. A _____ is a network typically found in your home or
workplace.
2. A _____ connection connects your home or workplace to the
Internet.
3. A _____ topology is also known as a hub-and-spoke topology.
4. The term ____ is used to describe the service-related entry
point for a provider.
5. The ______ ______ model is used to condense the core and
distribution layers into one layer.
6. A _____ is a virtualized piece of hardware that connects the
virtual machine operating system to the network.
7. Fibre Channel is typically found inside a _____.
8. The term used to reference the smallest piece of the
network is ______ ______.
9. The _____ technology uses labels to switch traffic.
10. The _____ _____ architecture is found in data centers to
provide low-latency connectivity to servers.
Review Questions
You can find the answers to the review questions in Appendix
B.
1. Which network type is locally owned and managed by an
organization and used to connect the organization's LAN
together?
A. MAN
B. CAN
C. WAN
D. PAN
2. Which network topology design has a centralized switch
connecting all of the devices?
A. Star topology
B. Full mesh topology
C. Partial mesh topology
D. Hybrid topology
3. Which protocol can be typically found inside a PAN?
A. Bluetooth
B. MPLS
C. SDWAN
D. vNIC
4. When computers are logically grouped on a LAN based
upon a functional department in the organization, what is
the group called?
A. Backbone
B. CAN
C. PAN
D. Workgroup
5. Which is the primary benefit to using a star topology?
A. Equal access
B. Simplicity
C. Easy to troubleshoot
D. Redundancy
6. What type of logical connection does MPLS create to
connect networks together?
A. Peer-to-peer
B. Client-server
C. East-west
D. Circuit
7. Which type of network is used exclusively for storage
traffic?
A. CAN
B. SAN
C. MAN
D. LAN
8. Which type of traffic flow is routed from your internal
network to the Internet?
A. North-south
B. East-west
C. WAN
D. MAN
9. Which topology incorporates some redundancy of
equipment and connections to provide fault tolerance but is
not completely fault-tolerant?
A. Bus
B. Mesh
C. Ring
D. Hybrid
10. Which topology should be selected if you have a central
office that needs to communicate with several branch
offices for WAN connectivity?
A. Point-to-point
B. Point-to-multipoint
C. Mesh
D. Bus
11. Which network architecture allows for access or sharing of
resources in a network by the same host?
A. Peer-to-peer
B. Client-server
C. LAN
D. Hybrid topology
12. Which is the major advantage of client-server network
architecture?
A. Distributed security
B. Centralized management
C. Flexibility
D. Equal access
13. You are setting up a network connection that requires
redundancy in the event a switch or single link fails. Which
topology should you select?
A. Bus
B. Ring
C. Star
D. Mesh
14. Where is the full mesh topology commonly seen in the
three-tier design model?
A. Core layer
B. Distribution layer
C. Access layer
D. Routing layer
15. Which connectivity method is used within a small
geographic area to connect an organization together?
A. MAN
B. LAN
C. SAN
D. PAN
16. Which virtual network element connects multiple VMs
together?
A. Hypervisor
B. vSwitch
C. Load balancer
D. NFV
17. When you tether a cell phone to your laptops using
wireless, what is this an example of?
A. SAN
B. MAN
C. CAN
D. PAN
18. What is the term used to describe the common network
used to connect multiple network segments at high speed?
A. Backbone
B. WAN
C. PAN
D. Workgroup
19. What is a smart jack as it relates to WAN connectivity?
A. Demarc
B. NFV
C. Load balancer
D. Router
20. Which protocol is used with dynamic multipoint VPN
deployments?
A. mGRE
B. MPLS
C. SDWAN
D. vNIC